[Amit Varma]: If a tree falls in a forest and no one is around to hear it, does it make a sound?
[Amit Varma]: The philosopher George Berkeley first asked this question in the early 18th century and
[Amit Varma]: a modern equivalent of it might well be, if you don't possess an ID card given by the
[Amit Varma]: state, do you even exist?
[Amit Varma]: This is a poignant question for many people, which is best illustrated by the story of
[Amit Varma]: Lal Bihari.
[Amit Varma]: Lal Bihari was a farmer from Azamgarh in Uttar Pradesh.
[Amit Varma]: He was born in 1951 and when he was 25 years old, in 1976, he was informed by a government
[Amit Varma]: official that he was dead.
[Amit Varma]: Apparently, his cousins had bribed a government officer to get him declared dead so that they
[Amit Varma]: could usurp his land.
[Amit Varma]: So now Lal Bihari told the officer, but I am here before you, you know me, I have met
[Amit Varma]: you before.
[Amit Varma]: The officer wouldn't listen.
[Amit Varma]: There weren't any documents to prove that he existed.
[Amit Varma]: So Lal Bihari now realized that to prove that he existed, he would have to get his name
[Amit Varma]: in the official records.
[Amit Varma]: He threw stones at a police station so that he would be arrested and his name would be
[Amit Varma]: on the records.
[Amit Varma]: No luck.
[Amit Varma]: He kidnapped his cousin.
[Amit Varma]: No one seemed to care, so he sent the boy home with an ice cream.
[Amit Varma]: He applied for compensation for his alleged widow.
[Amit Varma]: He organized his own funeral.
[Amit Varma]: And finally, he stood for elections against VP Singh from Allahabad in 1988 and Rajiv
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi in Amethi in 1989.
[Amit Varma]: He lost both elections.
[Amit Varma]: He was still dead.
[Amit Varma]: By this time, he had formed the Uttar Pradesh Mitak Sangh or the Dead Man's Association
[Amit Varma]: of Uttar Pradesh.
[Amit Varma]: They had 20,000 members, people who had been declared dead and did not have an ID with
[Amit Varma]: which they could prove their existence.
[Amit Varma]: Lal Bihari himself won a court case and was declared alive in 1994, two decades after
[Amit Varma]: being declared dead.
[Amit Varma]: But this land is still full of the walking dead.
[Amit Varma]: And my point in telling you this story is not that ID cards are a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: It's the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: My point is that no government should ever have such power over its citizens.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My topic for today is Aadhaar and my guest is my old friend Nikhil Pawar of Media Nama.
[Amit Varma]: When I started blogging a decade and a half ago, Nikhil was one of the early friends I
[Amit Varma]: made.
[Amit Varma]: In those days, he was a young roly poly cherubic N2 cutlet with a permanent smile on his face.
[Amit Varma]: And he's still a young roly poly cherubic N2 cutlet all these years later, except that
[Amit Varma]: now he is also one of the most formidable warriors of freedom in the online space.
[Amit Varma]: Nikhil runs Media Nama, a highly respected media company and has been a prominent digital
[Amit Varma]: activist, most well known for his Save the Internet campaign and for spearheading the
[Amit Varma]: fight against Aadhaar.
[Guest]: Nikhil, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thanks Amit and thanks for the great intro.
[Guest]: It's great to be talking to a friend about these issues because you know, that's when
[Guest]: you're most comfortable and we can have a great conversation, I hope.
[Amit Varma]: I want to make this episode a sort of a beginner's guide to Aadhaar to people who hear that term
[Amit Varma]: bandied about but aren't really sure what it is apart from just an ID card, which, you
[Amit Varma]: know, as you go on to enlighten us, it's not an ID card at all.
[Amit Varma]: But can we start by talking about all the various objections that you have to Aadhaar?
[Guest]: So there's a long list of them.
[Guest]: But the first part is that the idea that this is a national ID is a misnomer.
[Guest]: Because it's not national.
[Guest]: It's a resident ID.
[Guest]: If you are in India for 182 days or above, you can go and get an Aadhaar.
[Guest]: Which is why an Uzbek citizen in, I think, Vishakhapatnam had committed a crime and she
[Guest]: was caught with an Aadhaar card not in her name, in a fake name, in a sense, right?
[Guest]: There was a Pakistani national in Pathankot who was caught with an Aadhaar card as well.
[Guest]: So any foreigner who stayed in India over 182 days will need an Aadhaar card effectively
[Guest]: if they want a bank account, if they want a working mobile connection.
[Guest]: So it's not a national ID because anyone can get it.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that means it's a very weak form of ID because even like a passport or a driving
[Amit Varma]: license is a far better form of ID having gone through verifications.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, if someone has an Indian passport, you know, they're an Indian citizen, right?
[Guest]: So the other part of it is that it's also not an ID because there is no verification.
[Guest]: So what happens is that when you get an Aadhaar and I haven't gotten one and you haven't
[Amit Varma]: neither have I.
[Guest]: So essentially what happens is that you go, you take an existing ID and they take your
[Guest]: fingerprints, they take your iris scan and they give you an Aadhaar card after a particular
[Guest]: period of time.
[Guest]: There is a journalist called Devayan Roy who works with CNN and IBN and he went through
[Guest]: this process, realized that there was no verification that's taking place.
[Guest]: So he got an Aadhaar card made in a different name.
[Guest]: He went to the verification center and he got, they made a fake driver's license for
[Guest]: him I think.
[Guest]: And so both got submitted at the same time, his actual submission as well as his fake
[Guest]: one.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: So he reported it and the UIDF filed a case against him.
[Guest]: What happened eventually was that they granted him an Aadhaar in the false name.
[Guest]: So Devayan, now it's sad because Devayan is in court trying to get his Aadhaar in his
[Guest]: own name.
[Guest]: And you know, I asked the UIDF CEO that question at GCCS, which was a global conference taking
[Guest]: place in Delhi.
[Guest]: And he laughed and he said that, you know, I'm saying that he will be stuck with his
[Guest]: name for the rest of his life.
[Guest]: And this is the beauty of Aadhaar that if you get it in the wrong name, you're stuck
[Guest]: with that name for the rest of your life.
[Guest]: He said his words were that, you know, his child will go to school and say that my papa's
[Guest]: name has changed.
[Guest]: I mean, that's disgusting.
[Guest]: But it is what it is.
[Guest]: And it shows the mentality of the UIDF when it comes to these issues.
[Guest]: But the point is that anyone can take any ID and get an Aadhaar made in that name.
[Guest]: Now there are criminals who may have potentially changed their name now and now have a clean
[Guest]: record and there's no way of knowing that.
[Guest]: So you know, really when you look at Aadhaar from this perspective about being an ID, it's
[Guest]: not really an ID, it's more of a proof of authentication.
[Guest]: It's a proof that your fingerprint is connected to this Aadhaar number or not.
[Guest]: But there is no verification.
[Guest]: A passport is a better means of verification.
[Guest]: You have cops who come to your home, they talk to your neighbours, there's some amount
[Guest]: of physical check that takes place before you get a passport.
[Guest]: The scale at which Aadhaar has been implemented, it was impossible to do that.
[Guest]: The pace at which it was being implemented, there's a large number of fakes that would
[Guest]: have been created.
[Guest]: So that's another problem with Aadhaar that there were about 49,000 enrolment agencies
[Guest]: whose license was cancelled for violation of processes when it came to the creation
[Guest]: of Aadhaar, including one that was storing biometrics and effectively using replay biometrics
[Guest]: which generate new Aadhaar numbers because they were being paid per ID generated.
[Guest]: And so the incentive structure was created in a manner that they would create more enrolments
[Guest]: and there was no way of checking this.
[Guest]: I think the whole system is flawed in the way it has been developed and there's a Silicon
[Guest]: Valley philosophy that goes move fast and break things.
[Guest]: There is an agile development sort of approach which says that start and then keep iterating
[Guest]: and keep improving.
[Guest]: But when you're looking at something of a national scale that impacts the lives of people,
[Guest]: I think the philosophy we ought to have is move slow and fix things.
[Guest]: You know, you have to be deliberate, you have to be conscious, you have to monitor and you
[Guest]: have to fix these problems before it impacts a large number of people.
[Guest]: In this case, the rush to just get more and more people on board and this is something
[Guest]: which Nandan Nilekani has talked about, which is that if you move so very, very quickly
[Guest]: in these things, the opposition does not have time to consolidate.
[Guest]: So by the time they realized what was going on, these guys had moved much further ahead.
[Amit Varma]: Did he say this approvingly?
[Guest]: I think he said this as a strategy that they deployed because there was opposition to Aadhaar
[Guest]: from the very beginning as well.
[Guest]: So I'm saying that this is the negative outcome of the problems that we're facing now is an
[Guest]: outcome of the rush.
[Guest]: So that was another point that I wanted to make about how not to create a national ID
[Guest]: is, haste is bad.
[Guest]: You are going to mess up people's life if you do that.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing to remember is that there is so much at stake, like, it makes me really
[Amit Varma]: angry when you just told me, you know, what the UAE IDI chairman said about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Deba and Roy being stuck with a fake name forever and almost a sense of Schadenfreude
[Amit Varma]: that he kind of expressed is that they control the lives of the people.
[Amit Varma]: This whole approach that the people belong to the state and we can do what we want with
[Amit Varma]: you.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, I started my show with an intro about Lal Bihari Mirtak who you must
[Guest]: have heard of.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And, and that attitude just infuriates me.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: And therefore, this is also about, so, is us as citizens and as people being deprived
[Guest]: of agency.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: We are not given a choice about whether we want an Aadhaar or not.
[Guest]: And so, you know, I think there's, this is one of the challenges that we face and this
[Guest]: is why there's a great deal of anger amongst people right now, because you're constantly
[Guest]: bombarded with messages about having been forced to link it.
[Guest]: The question that I would like to ask is how many people who've gotten an Aadhaar actually
[Unknown]: wanted to get one?
[Guest]: And how many have been forced to get one?
[Guest]: And by making it mandatory for so many things, you've effectively forced, like, I know,
[Guest]: students who didn't want one but had to get one because they wouldn't be allowed to sit
[Guest]: in exams if they didn't have one.
[Guest]: And how do they feel about this is something that we have to take into account.
[Guest]: And this is an argument that's also being made in court, that it's, we have the right
[Guest]: to informational self-determination, which is that we have the right to choose what we
[Guest]: want to do with our information, who we give it to.
[Guest]: And by being forced to get an Aadhaar and being forced to give this information to the
[Guest]: government, we are being dropped off our agency.
[Guest]: What's happening with Aadhaar in this case is that it is, it's taking your and my personal
[Guest]: information, converting it into a public asset, and then privatizing it without us having
[Guest]: a choice.
[Guest]: So, for example, the National Health Information Network is probably going to get rolled out
[Guest]: next year with Aadhaar linked electronic health records.
[Guest]: Last year, Viral Acharya, the deputy governor of the RBI spoke about the creation of a public
[Guest]: credit registry, which then startups can build businesses on top of, saying that the baseline
[Guest]: of personal credit information, the financial transactions that we do, will be provided
[Guest]: by the government.
[Guest]: And then they can add their own data sets on top of it to provide you more granular
[Guest]: services.
[Guest]: Now, this is good, but the question is, where is the agency here in the sense, do we have
[Guest]: choice?
[Guest]: Are we giving consent?
[Guest]: So we're being forced to part with our data.
[Guest]: And the idea is to build businesses on top of that data.
[Amit Varma]: And then what I keep telling people is, you know, whatever you say about Aadhaar, my fundamental
[Amit Varma]: objection to it, as you correctly nailed right now, is a question of consent.
[Amit Varma]: It's a coercion that we are forced to take Aadhaar.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you might say it's insecure or it's not insecure or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But if you have the agency to be able to decide, that's fine.
[Amit Varma]: And the whole Aadhaar imbroglio, in a sense, illustrates the perversity of what the state
[Amit Varma]: has become.
[Amit Varma]: The state is ideally there to protect our rights and to protect our property.
[Amit Varma]: But now what is happening is, I am told that if by 31st March, I don't link my Aadhaar
[Amit Varma]: to my bank account, they could freeze my bank account.
[Amit Varma]: The government is there to protect my money, not to, you know, I mean, is basically theft
[Amit Varma]: if not destruction.
[Guest]: No, and what this does essentially is that it's changing the relationship between the
[Guest]: citizen and the state, because of all the information that they're now able to collect
[Guest]: on you.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So if you go back to the idea of Aadhaar, I think you need to look at it from a mass
[Guest]: surveillance perspective.
[Guest]: So about, I think, five, six years ago, we heard about this project being rolled out
[Guest]: called NatGrid, which was a national intelligence grid, effectively.
[Guest]: And the idea was that it would connect 21 databases together.
[Guest]: So your bank, your mobile, etc, all of these things.
[Guest]: Now, you know, if you think about it, an Amit Sharma in one database is not going to be
[Guest]: an Amit Sharma in another database, right?
[Guest]: The de-duplication is very difficult, because the names are going to be, are the same across.
[Guest]: John Smith, you know, from that perspective.
[Guest]: What the Aadhaar number does is it de-duplicates these databases.
[Guest]: This two of NatGrid, at least from what I've read, is going to have 955 public and private
[Guest]: databases.
[Guest]: So every aspect of your life, every interaction is going to effectively become an Aadhaar
[Guest]: linked database, which will then be available to the state when they want to glean information
[Guest]: about you.
[Guest]: Now, zoom out and look at the impact that can have on a democracy, and that impact that
[Guest]: can have on an individual's agency, if the state has that much informational power over
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: And so these are very dangerous times for us as citizens and for our rights.
[Guest]: Also for the opposition parties, because you know, this government may not be that bad,
[Guest]: but who knows five governments down the line, you will have a totalitarian entity that uses
[Guest]: this information to effectively change the course of history forever.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, every individual should just think of the government in power as being the absolute
[Amit Varma]: worst that he can think of, whatever that might be.
[Amit Varma]: And you give them this much power.
[Amit Varma]: And you said earlier that this reverses the relationship between the citizen and the state.
[Amit Varma]: I would actually say it illustrates it.
[Amit Varma]: And in the sense that it's pretty much been this way that the state has treated its citizens
[Amit Varma]: as its subjects.
[Amit Varma]: And the difference of Aadhaar and the control that they have over our lives, because our
[Amit Varma]: data now belongs to them, is that the state is empowered, like typically, you'd imagine
[Amit Varma]: that in these modern times, technology empowers individuals.
[Amit Varma]: But here you actually have Aadhaar empowering the state against its individuals instead
[Guest]: of, you know, protecting the individuals.
[Guest]: So one of the arguments that's being made is that Google has your data, Facebook has
[Guest]: your data.
[Guest]: That's voluntary.
[Guest]: So one part is yes, that is voluntary, but also they have a lot of data about you.
[Guest]: So you know, we're in an era where all of these entities have a large amount of information
[Guest]: about us.
[Guest]: But we really have little control over information that is us.
[Guest]: In the sense, in today's day and age, we are data, you know, we, every single activity
[Guest]: that we do generates data.
[Guest]: You have, people are talking about the quantified self with, I mean, I have a friend who stuck
[Guest]: some device in his arm, and he uses it to monitor his blood sugar levels, that's going
[Guest]: to an app.
[Guest]: So we're generating truckloads of information about ourselves and we'll continue to do that.
[Guest]: The power equation with the platforms is also something to consider.
[Guest]: So the state's solution for dealing with that changing power equation, and these platforms
[Guest]: like, you know, whether it's Google or Facebook or it's Amazon, it's Microsoft, Tencent, Baidu,
[Guest]: the state's solution there is to, hey, give us your data as well, so we'll also use that.
[Guest]: So we're effectively in a situation where there is a global market failure in data protection
[Guest]: and privacy.
[Guest]: And the solution to that problem shouldn't be more data.
[Amit Varma]: It should be giving us more control over our data.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the fundamental role of the government should be to protect the rights of its citizens,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore the government should be putting that data, those data protection laws in place
[Amit Varma]: rather than trying to exploit its absence.
[Guest]: So this is one of the problems with Aadhaar, that Aadhaar was brought in through an ordinance
[Guest]: initially, without a privacy law in place, there still isn't a privacy law.
[Guest]: The current committee that's looking at the privacy law is essentially, it has people
[Guest]: who've argued against a fundamental right to privacy in the Supreme Court, right?
[Guest]: It has a CEO of the UIDA and the UIDA is really not one that's going to uphold privacy the
[Guest]: way it's operating right now.
[Guest]: So we have a problem here that we don't have a data protection law, Aadhaar, even when
[Guest]: it was taken through Parliament, it was taken as a money bill, with the Rajya Sabha having
[Guest]: no role except making recommendations which the Lok Sabha rejected, because the current
[Guest]: government has a majority in the Lok Sabha.
[Guest]: And those protection requirements were actually fairly good in the sense you had, one was
[Guest]: for the definition of national security, because in India, there is no definition.
[Guest]: So the state has complete freedom in terms of who, under what causes it goes and snoops
[Guest]: on someone.
[Guest]: You know, there was purpose limitation, which was another solution where you can only limit
[Guest]: it to a few select services, and not build a whole private ecosystem or enable a whole
[Guest]: private ecosystem on the basis of our data.
[Guest]: So checks and balances were essentially rejected in Parliament.
[Guest]: And therefore, even from like, it's almost been a journey of the state constantly trying
[Guest]: to hoodwink its citizens over the last few years.
[Guest]: And this is not just the BJP, by the way, it happened with the Congress as well.
[Guest]: It's a DNA of the state.
[Guest]: It's a state.
[Guest]: And so I'm very worried about where we're going with this and how the future is going
[Guest]: to be, if this is allowed, because, you know, I don't, I don't, I'm not sure whether the
[Guest]: Supreme Court judges really realize the ramifications of what they're dealing with over here.
[Guest]: We got a great judgment in terms of the fundamental right to privacy.
[Guest]: But the way it looks at, there were exceptions that were brought in, especially for welfare.
[Guest]: And that's what the lawyers, some lawyers that I've spoken with seem to think that,
[Guest]: that is a means of justifying Aadhaar.
[Guest]: So we don't know where this case is going to go, but I think it's pretty worrying.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on with your laundry list of objections to Aadhaar, which I know is a long one.
[Guest]: It's a long one.
[Guest]: So the other is that, actually, this is about the permanence of the Aadhaar number, which
[Guest]: is a single permanent number that is you effectively, and the permanence of biometrics as a password.
[Guest]: Now that's just stupid, because if, imagine having an email address with a permanent password
[Guest]: that you can't change.
[Guest]: Mind boggling.
[Guest]: So this is, and, and what's happened over the past few years is that government departments
[Guest]: have been leaking Aadhaar numbers and a lot of personal information by the millions.
[Guest]: I mean, a CIS report pointed out that only about four schemes had, have had details of
[Guest]: over 135 million people.
[Guest]: And all of this is available on Google search.
[Amit Varma]: So sketch out a scenario for me, what happens if some, what can, what can go wrong if someone's
[Guest]: Aadhaar number gets leaked?
[Guest]: First, let me tell you what information it had.
[Guest]: Because I've seen some of these Excel sheets, because government departments uploaded Excel
[Guest]: sheets with personal information on their websites.
[Guest]: And you had to do a Google search for a file type xlsx in quotes Aadhaar number, and you
[Guest]: would get some of these sheets, which you can download and get people's personal details.
[Guest]: So they had Aadhaar number, bank account, address, date of birth, father slash spouse's
[Guest]: name, you know, gender in some cases, caste and religion in some cases in Excel sheets.
[Amit Varma]: So spell out for me, what can go wrong when this kind of data gets released or falls into
[Guest]: the wrong hands?
[Guest]: So, one is of course targeting, you know, if as Aadhaar gets linked to more and more
[Guest]: things, individuals can be targeted in a manner which is predatory.
[Guest]: And we've seen some of this happen, because the information that's being leaked where
[Guest]: you had a situation where people were getting phone calls saying, I'm calling from so and
[Guest]: so bank, is this your Aadhaar number?
[Guest]: Is this, is this your bank account number?
[Guest]: I'm sending you a verification code because you have to link your Aadhaar to your bank.
[Guest]: And then people would give that detail and they would find that money's been transferred
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Guest]: In fact, this happened to a member of parliament in Punjab, as well.
[Guest]: I received a call in fact, and I have the audio of that because I recorded it, where,
[Guest]: and it wasn't Aadhaar related, but because I don't have an Aadhaar, but it was related
[Guest]: to PhonePe, which is a UPI payments app, which I use.
[Guest]: And so the person didn't realize that I know about the payments ecosystem.
[Guest]: He said, I'm sending you a verification code.
[Guest]: When I looked at my phone, it was a password reset code.
[Guest]: And so for most people who can't understand English, and because this, they're going to
[Guest]: give this information away, because they think that the person who's calling them is legitimately
[Guest]: calling from these places.
[Amit Varma]: And how did you realize it was a password reset code?
[Amit Varma]: It would have just been a number, right?
[Guest]: No, it said your password reset code, so credit to PhonePe over here.
[Guest]: It said your password reset code is so and so.
[Guest]: So I think, but again, it was entirely in English, right?
[Guest]: So you know, and so we are going to face problems because there are issues of information asymmetry
[Guest]: and bounded rationality.
[Guest]: And people may not understand the implications of what they're doing, and they might find
[Guest]: that money's been funneled and they've been wiped out.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: But they still have their Aadhaar number, they still have their Aadhaar number.
[Guest]: So again, so going back to the issues, one major problem is a centralization of all this
[Guest]: data in a single database.
[Guest]: And so what we found a month or so ago, there was a story broken by Rasna Khera of the Tribune,
[Guest]: where she was added to a WhatsApp group of people who were allowing, who were selling
[Guest]: access to the Aadhaar database.
[Guest]: So what the government had done was they had made some village level entrepreneurs at some
[Guest]: common service centers, customer support people for you know, people who walk up to them saying
[Guest]: we have these issues, etc, and that allowed access to the Aadhaar database.
[Guest]: They were selling access to the database at 500 rupees a pop.
[Guest]: And they were doing that because there were no checks and balances in place in terms of
[Guest]: permissions.
[Guest]: So you know, if you use WordPress, you have administrator, editor, contributor, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So here's the thing, WordPress was started what in 2004-2005, WordPress then had a better
[Guest]: permission architecture than Aadhaar does today.
[Guest]: And so people who've got access get access to the entire database.
[Guest]: From a centralization database, the other issue is that if it gets compromised, if access
[Guest]: gets compromised, the access to the entire database gets compromised.
[Guest]: It's not in silos, it's not like as per district and you have limited amount of access.
[Guest]: So it's a bad idea because it creates a single point of failure.
[Guest]: The other single point of failure is the Aadhaar number itself, because it's a unification
[Guest]: of an identity into a single number.
[Guest]: So you know, today you can give your driver's license somewhere as an ID proof, you can
[Guest]: give your PAN, you can give your Aadhaar number.
[Guest]: If you have federated IDs or separate IDs, then there is a certain amount of security
[Guest]: that comes in because only one part will get compromised.
[Guest]: Sometimes if people take a driver's license, they don't know what that is ID proof for.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: No one knows what you've given as an ID proof for your bank.
[Guest]: It could be one of multiple things.
[Guest]: But if there's a single number that is the ID proof for everything, and remember, it's
[Guest]: not an ID proof, right?
[Guest]: It's effectively it can compromise you across the board.
[Guest]: Once someone has your Aadhaar number, all they need is your biometrics, or they need
[Guest]: an OTP.
[Guest]: OTP is easily hackable.
[Guest]: And biometrics have been cloned from fingerprints.
[Guest]: There were school students, I think the college students in Bombay, who found faking attendance
[Guest]: because they had cloned fingerprints and you had attendance based on fingerprint authentication.
[Guest]: In Surat, biometrics were being sold, biometric databases were being sold.
[Guest]: And I saw this photograph of a pink thumb impression, which someone could just take
[Guest]: and put on a authentication machine.
[Guest]: So again, because you're using biometrics and biometrics have been cloned, the iris
[Guest]: has been cloned, the fingerprint has been cloned, a face ID is even easier to clone
[Guest]: from from photographs.
[Guest]: You are going to have problems going forward.
[Amit Varma]: No, and also, you know, if any system can be gamed, it will be gamed.
[Amit Varma]: And here you have a government which is building a system and the government is always going
[Amit Varma]: to be staggeringly incompetent at this.
[Amit Varma]: And the ingenuity we have in our country, we can game anything.
[Amit Varma]: You put the two together, and it's a recipe for disaster.
[Guest]: And we've seen multiple instances of that.
[Guest]: So again, from a security access perspective, in UP, there was a case where people had cloned
[Guest]: fingerprints and they were generating Aadhaar numbers and they were selling that software
[Guest]: bypassing the iris authentication for an enrolment officer by essentially patching the Aadhaar
[Guest]: enrolment software.
[Amit Varma]: Because of bad incentives, they were paid by the number of Aadhaars generated.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Again, right now it is enrolment.
[Guest]: Once enrolment is finished, if, let's say 100% or given that they're probably fakes
[Guest]: in the system, 106% of this country is enrolled, then you will find other scams emerging bit
[Guest]: by bit.
[Guest]: We don't know the scale of this problem.
[Guest]: And there are, like I said, 49,000 enrolment agencies whose license was cancelled.
[Guest]: And we don't know how many fakes there are in the system right now.
[Guest]: For all those people who were enrolled by those agencies, have they been re-enrolled
[Guest]: or not?
[Guest]: Is there any information to that effect so far?
[Guest]: We don't know.
[Guest]: And that's again because of a lack of transparency from the UIDAI.
[Guest]: They are repeatedly rejecting requests of right to information.
[Guest]: So they have something to hide it seems.
[Guest]: But again, going back to the earlier point about this relationship between the state
[Guest]: and the citizen, we're in a situation where transparency is expected of citizens but not
[Amit Varma]: of the state.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And there are millions of common citizens who are victims of this.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you spoke about Debayan Roy and obviously he's privileged enough that
[Unknown]: you were speaking about him and asking questions about him.
[Amit Varma]: But most common people have no recourse at all.
[Amit Varma]: They may not even know English.
[Amit Varma]: They may not know how to negotiate the system in any way whatsoever.
[Guest]: And I don't think, I mean, there's a separate debate to be had on the state of media and
[Guest]: the economic health of media in this country right now.
[Guest]: But really, most publications don't have people who can go out into the villages and see the
[Guest]: kind of problems that they're facing.
[Guest]: Scroll has done some great work on this.
[Guest]: And one of the one of the main issues that's coming up is exclusion.
[Guest]: So you know, I'm a ghost right now and I'm assuming so are you because neither of us
[Amit Varma]: have either.
[Amit Varma]: Exist.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And the problem right now is that for a lot of people, especially in Rajasthan and Jharkhand
[Guest]: where it's been made mandatory to the greatest extent for getting welfare, old people, daily
[Guest]: wage laborers whose fingerprints either change or don't work or there isn't sufficient connectivity,
[Guest]: they're not getting their welfare.
[Guest]: So and there are people, instances of people who have died because they haven't gotten
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Think of an 80 year old woman who had to now has to go 20 kilometers to authenticate with
[Guest]: her fingerprints that may or may not work and then therefore has to go repeatedly.
[Guest]: Whereas earlier she could have given her ration card to a neighbor to go and get that.
[Guest]: Now and there was pilferage that was taking place earlier.
[Guest]: But there are also instances emerging in news reports of people, you know, for whom the
[Guest]: fingerprint authentication has failed based on what the person who's giving rations is
[Guest]: saying.
[Guest]: And what they found is that that authentication actually worked and the rations were essentially
[Guest]: pilfered out.
[Guest]: So it's not really affecting pilferage or stealing of rations as much because you may
[Guest]: have authentication that's taking place but you're not able to address quantity theft.
[Guest]: So as an effective mechanism, it's not really working and even the numbers that they're
[Guest]: talking about have been overstated.
[Guest]: We've done detailed analysis, Anand Venkatanayanan is a person who's done detailed analysis on
[Guest]: how the numbers are overstated by thousands of multiples, I mean, where it might be about
[Guest]: 150 crore in savings is being posited as 49,000 crores of savings or something like that.
[Guest]: So again, because there is lack of transparency from the government and because there's also
[Guest]: attribution to Aadhaar where it shouldn't exist, for example, in case of West Bengal,
[Guest]: ghosts and fakes were effectively removed through door-to-door surveys.
[Guest]: But the savings from what we understand are being attributed to Aadhaar.
[Guest]: So it's essentially, right now the system is geared up towards doing anything possible
[Guest]: to save Aadhaar.
[Amit Varma]: And again, within the welfare delivery system, it's had the effect of empowering the rent-seekers,
[Amit Varma]: which is the opposite effect that you'd want.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, just more than that, you know, people have died because they haven't got
[Amit Varma]: admission to hospitals because the people demanded an Aadhaar card.
[Amit Varma]: We've heard horror stories like that.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a moral cost to that.
[Amit Varma]: And it infuriates me that people sitting in air-conditioned cabins in Delhi treat this
[Amit Varma]: as collateral damage, you know, much as it did during demonetization.
[Amit Varma]: Talking about vague long-term benefits while there is actual suffering happening on the
[Guest]: ground.
[Guest]: But I think that's kind of the state of political discourse today, that growth at any cost and
[Guest]: people are being seen as collateral damage and you're trying to digitize the economy
[Guest]: by forcing people into it.
[Guest]: See, I'm, I'm someone who loves tech, I've covered the space for 12 years, love the internet.
[Guest]: I've always been idealistic about the role that technology can play in the sense, even
[Guest]: Medianama is built on this idea that our role is to help enable an open, fair and competitive
[Guest]: digital ecosystem in the country.
[Guest]: So I love the space.
[Guest]: But really what turned my thinking around Aadhaar was this, this was around demonetization
[Guest]: and digital payments and when people were primarily talking about forcing change upon
[Guest]: the country, almost like it being, so, you know, I likened it to white man's burden as
[Guest]: digital man's burden, that it is the role of the digitally enabled to force everyone
[Guest]: to become digitally enabled.
[Guest]: And that's not the, that's not how I became digitally enabled.
[Guest]: It was by choice, it was his agency.
[Guest]: And so there's a philosophical shift that has taken place where those who've benefited
[Guest]: from it feel that it's their job to force others to conform to it.
[Guest]: And because it brings in efficiency and savings and power for them, but I think this is largely
[Guest]: about power.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting, you'll hear supporters of Prime Minister Modi talking about how they
[Amit Varma]: hate communism and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But all of this is right out of Chairman Mao's playbook.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the mass coercion during the time of demonetization, the kind of social engineering
[Amit Varma]: that is being attempted in various ways of which Aadhaar is a phenomenally powerful tool.
[Guest]: Well, if you if you look at the removal of agency, the one aspect that really stands
[Guest]: out is in the Aadhaar Act, where if your data gets stolen, you can't go to court.
[Guest]: My God.
[Guest]: So the law disables you from going to court, only the UIDAI can go to court.
[Guest]: Now, why would the UIDAI go to court against another government department?
[Guest]: So far, they've only gone to court against journalists and researchers who've pointed
[Guest]: out issues with Aadhaar, which is again a wrong thing to do, because it shoots the messenger.
[Guest]: But they've not gone to court against at least 216 websites that were publishing Aadhaar
[Guest]: information, even though the Aadhaar Act doesn't allow it.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, you should have, if your rights are infringed, you should be able to
[Guest]: go to court on your own behalf.
[Guest]: It's not just that, what, what that system, if you're able to go to court, it helps correct
[Guest]: the system.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So effectively, Aadhaar is not going to get fixed unless someone goes to court.
[Guest]: If your data gets stolen, and you go to court, it forces people to make the systems more
[Guest]: secure because they might get fined or someone might get jailed.
[Guest]: But now those incentives don't exist.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So, so, so that's, and I think from what I remember, when, when Ravi Shankar Prasad,
[Guest]: the IT minister was asked about this in Parliament, I think he said that, you know, if we do that,
[Guest]: then there would be too many cases, which is almost an admission of a problem.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, which also indicates his government's unceasing focus on optics.
[Amit Varma]: They don't care what really happens.
[Amit Varma]: They just care how it's reported.
[Guest]: Well, I don't know about that aspect of it.
[Guest]: But from one of the things that I've noticed is that there's also a great deal of lying
[Guest]: that's going on, like this constant refrain that there has been no breach.
[Guest]: And that's optics effectively, right?
[Guest]: But the fact is that a breach is unauthorized access.
[Guest]: So if Rasna Khera of the Tribune was able to get unauthorized access to the Aadhaar
[Guest]: database by paying 500 bucks to someone, that is a breach.
[Guest]: You know, if let's say Abhinav Srivastava, a developer in Bangalore, was able to access
[Guest]: the Aadhaar database, because NIC, a government body was running access to it on HTTP instead
[Guest]: of HTTPS.
[Guest]: And it's a non secure connection, which can effectively data can be taken from that.
[Guest]: That is a breach.
[Guest]: If biometrics have been cloned or being sold, that is a breach.
[Guest]: So you know, I think by denying that there's a problem, we're not going to solve it.
[Guest]: Because, you know, if you think about it from a governance standpoint, the first part of
[Guest]: the solution is to accept that there's a problem, then it is to involve the right minded stakeholders
[Guest]: in trying to figure out the source of the problem, trying to find out the solution.
[Guest]: And it and then solving it, and also informing about solving it and bringing in processes
[Guest]: of transparency, so that there is accountability in the future.
[Guest]: None of this is happening right now.
[Guest]: And so we're just digging ourselves a deeper hole by denying that the problem exists.
[Guest]: So you know, another part of the problem with the way Aadhaar is being run is that there
[Guest]: is no monitoring mechanism.
[Guest]: There is only there's only an audit mechanism, which means that someone has to do an audit
[Guest]: to find a problem.
[Guest]: Now, nobody seems to be doing that audit because journalists and researchers are finding problems,
[Guest]: and the UIDA goes and sues them for it.
[Guest]: If that problem hadn't been reported by a news agency, the UIDA probably would never
[Guest]: have known about it and the leaks would have kept happening.
[Amit Varma]: And you're actually disincentivizing people from finding the problems in the system you're
[Amit Varma]: supposed to run.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: But more, I mean, it's just as important to remember, if there is a problem, and nobody
[Guest]: reports it, going back to your tree falls in a forest example, who knows, there is probably
[Guest]: data leaking everywhere that we don't even know about.
[Guest]: So that's why you have researchers, there's some anonymous Twitter handle called F society
[Guest]: right now that is, that's effectively, constantly, almost on a daily basis pointing out issues
[Guest]: with Aadhaar.
[Guest]: Because an anonymous handle probably has a better chance of doing that.
[Guest]: Because if an Indian handled it, they'd probably get sued or they get put in jail.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a sneaky feeling that anonymous handle is also a ghost like us.
[Guest]: No, but, you know, so going back to the agency issue, the UIDA under the Aadhaar Act can
[Guest]: also cancel your Aadhaar number for any reason they may deem necessary.
[Guest]: And do you have recourse, can you go to court?
[Guest]: I'm not sure about the recourse part.
[Guest]: Because if you think about it, only the UIDA can go to court.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And also only even if everyone could go to court, only the incredibly privileged people
[Amit Varma]: like us would actually be able to do so at a practical level.
[Amit Varma]: Most people in this country, they don't really have that option.
[Guest]: I mean, but you know, they also don't have it easy even getting an Aadhaar number.
[Guest]: So you know, you've seen instances of enrollment agencies because of the atmosphere of desperation
[Guest]: that has been created by the government, having to pay bribes to get an Aadhaar number.
[Guest]: It's supposed to be very cheap, but the people who've had to pay 300, 500, 1000 bucks to
[Guest]: get an Aadhaar number.
[Guest]: And this is essentially rent seeking that's happening at an enrollment level right now.
[Guest]: There will probably be rent seeking that will happen if you need to get some data changed.
[Guest]: So we don't know where this is going, but really that's where the corruption has come
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: If you look at it, Aadhaar has effectively enabled corruption at that level, even though
[Guest]: the state may not see it as that.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, as the old saying goes, power corrupts.
[Amit Varma]: So the more power you give, the more corruption you will have.
[Amit Varma]: That's a truism.
[Guest]: What else is in your laundry list?
[Guest]: So one of the things is that the people who've already been compromised forever.
[Guest]: And so that's one of the problems I have with Aadhaar, that the leaks have happened at such
[Guest]: a large scale that we really don't know what to do about it.
[Guest]: So if someone's actual information about their bank account number, Aadhaar number, religion,
[Guest]: address, date of birth, father's name slash husband's name, if all of that identifiable
[Guest]: information that can be used to compromise them has been put in the public domain or
[Guest]: has been leaked, how do you protect them?
[Guest]: What do you do for them?
[Guest]: They're compromised for the rest of their lives.
[Amit Varma]: That ship has sailed.
[Guest]: They're just unlucky.
[Guest]: They can't do anything.
[Guest]: I'd love suggestions on how we can fix that now.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: So the way I look at it is that this is an increasing problem.
[Guest]: And we need to suspend Aadhaar right now to mitigate the problem.
[Guest]: I don't know if we can solve it.
[Guest]: But at least for the time being, we need to recheck our processes.
[Guest]: We need to figure out where all the leaks are happening.
[Guest]: And you can't do that with an ongoing system because, you know, it's like you plug one
[Guest]: hole and then you suddenly realize there's another one, there's another one, there's
[Guest]: another one.
[Amit Varma]: This is not something that can be done live.
[Amit Varma]: First you plug all the holes, then you think about repairing the wall at a fundamental
[Guest]: level.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And that's what, so we first need to suspend the project and figure out where all the problems
[Guest]: lie.
[Guest]: You know, so I also mentioned about not being able to count the fakes in the Aadhaar system
[Guest]: because there is no way of knowing if you've created a fake Aadhaar number or an ID.
[Guest]: You will never know.
[Guest]: In fact, you can essentially take a photo of an Aadhaar card, put in any random number,
[Guest]: put in your photograph, put in any random name and it's an Aadhaar card.
[Guest]: And most people will accept it as a proof of identification because of the environment
[Guest]: that we've created where it's acceptable.
[Guest]: So you know, in most countries they have chips and that chip is a means of authentication.
[Guest]: You can't really put in a fingerprint scanner everywhere and I don't think people should
[Guest]: be going and scanning their fingerprints everywhere because it's so easy to clone fingerprints.
[Guest]: Like you know, someone can just place a machine before you, you put your fingerprint, you
[Guest]: put your thumb on it and they say, oh, this one didn't work and they put another one and
[Amit Varma]: that works.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And they could have just cloned it for the first one.
[Guest]: It's the same thing with credit cards, the way you clone it, yeah.
[Guest]: So the other problem is that 15 states have already taken copies of the Aadhaar database
[Guest]: under something called the SRDH or the State Resident Data Hubs.
[Guest]: Now in Andhra, what we've seen is that all sorts of information is being linked to it.
[Guest]: So you know, the UIDA and Ravi Shankar Prasad have gone out and said that we're only collecting
[Guest]: demographic data, which you would give to your bank or your mobile operator and stuff
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: But at the state level, they're linking stuff like traffic violations to it.
[Guest]: They're linking property records, petty crimes information, and this is happening in case
[Guest]: of Andhra Pradesh.
[Guest]: Now what you develop effectively over a period of time when you start collecting and linking
[Guest]: all of this information is you get a 360 degree profile of each single individual.
[Guest]: And that kind of data in the hands of a state is very dangerous, you know, because historically
[Guest]: even income tax records have been out of bounds for other government departments.
[Guest]: So the silos that existed, which protected us, are now being broken through the creation
[Guest]: of the centralized database.
[Guest]: And so the scale of the problems that this is going to cause is something we don't even
[Guest]: realize right now.
[Guest]: It's difficult to comprehend because there are also no checks and balances in place.
[Guest]: So many of these states don't have a state level Aadhaar Act to regulate the collection
[Guest]: and sharing of this information.
[Guest]: Now one argument that UIDA is making is that the Aadhaar Act also applies to the states,
[Guest]: where the states already have collected way more information than the Aadhaar Act allows
[Guest]: the central government to take.
[Guest]: So the ambiguity is actually there right now to be misused.
[Amit Varma]: And just thinking aloud, the political repercussions of this on our democracy can be staggering.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just to take two examples, in 1984, we now know that a lot of the rioters had
[Amit Varma]: electoral rolls, by which they identified which house the people they wanted to victimize
[Amit Varma]: lived in and they just went door to door to those houses and, you know, and that is just
[Amit Varma]: a very limited set of data and the damage it caused.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, you saw recently how T-Star Settle Wards credit card details were leaked out
[Amit Varma]: at a government press conference where they said that, listen, this woman spent her, used
[Amit Varma]: her credit card to buy alcohol, as if buying alcohol is a crime.
[Amit Varma]: And the fact is that data should not have been out there.
[Guest]: Exactly in what right does a government have to release that data in the first place?
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: I mean, they should have the data and if they have it, you know.
[Guest]: So that affects the opposition in a democracy.
[Amit Varma]: And it has a chilling effect on the opposition as well.
[Amit Varma]: If you know your bank account can be freezed, if your entire life can be shut down.
[Guest]: Well, look at it from another perspective, right?
[Guest]: The beauty of digital is that the data is digital.
[Guest]: And so therefore, the data can be manipulated.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So if, let's say, there's a murder that's taken place three, four kilometers from here,
[Guest]: how do I know that Amit wasn't there?
[Guest]: If his location data puts him there, if he's done a credit card transaction in the same
[Guest]: building at some stop on the ground floor, right?
[Amit Varma]: So these are things...
[Amit Varma]: You think you're giving ideas that will get me into trouble, buddy, you've got more enemies
[Amit Varma]: than I do right now.
[Guest]: Well, so just going back to that last example, the other thing you have to keep in mind in
[Guest]: terms of the databases that get created is that there is no control that the UIDAI has
[Guest]: on private databases.
[Guest]: So through this AKYC mechanism, which is why I started off by saying that this is the conversion
[Guest]: of personal data into a public asset, and then privatized, is that private agencies
[Guest]: are now and private entities are now creating their own databases built on this information.
[Guest]: And so what we saw, for example, in case of Reliance Jio and the data that had leaked
[Guest]: last year, was that someone launched a site called magicapk.com, because there was a vulnerability
[Guest]: at some vendors database, I mean, this is what I read in the news reports, at some vendors
[Guest]: code side that Jio had given them access to.
[Guest]: They started a site where you had to put in a mobile number and they would give you demographic
[Guest]: details.
[Guest]: Now, the Aadhaar number area in that was kept blank.
[Guest]: So I'm not sure whether they had access to it or not, but who's to say that there won't
[Guest]: be other players that might actually store that and add more information?
[Guest]: And how does a UIDAI keep this data secure after it has left the UIDAI?
[Guest]: See, when you do a credit card transaction, you know that, you know, Amazon sometimes
[Guest]: stores your card, you can allow, sorry, you can allow Amazon to store your card details.
[Guest]: But Amazon goes through this compliance mechanism called PCI DSS, which is a data security standard
[Guest]: that it has to follow in order to be allowed to store the data.
[Guest]: In case of Aadhaar, I don't know if there is a mechanism to actually check whether people
[Guest]: are maintaining certain data security standards or not.
[Guest]: And given the way NIC has given access to the database on HTTP, and NIC is both an AUA,
[Guest]: which is an Aadhaar user agency and a KUA, which is a KYC user agency, which again can
[Guest]: share demographic information.
[Guest]: I don't think it's following the protocols, but it's a government body, so I don't know
[Guest]: what the government is going to do about it.
[Guest]: Is it going to cancel the license of another government body?
[Amit Varma]: Highly unlikely.
[Amit Varma]: So this is damn confusing, because I see like two contradictory dystopian situations.
[Amit Varma]: One situation is that we have a government which is so inept that it is messing everything
[Amit Varma]: up and is making a mess of the whole thing.
[Amit Varma]: But the other dystopian situation is that if you really look at it, this is if you wanted
[Amit Varma]: to be a totalitarian state with everyone's data under your control and everyone's, you
[Amit Varma]: know, life one fingertip away from destruction, this is a masterful way of doing it.
[Amit Varma]: Which do you think is more true?
[Guest]: I'm not going to second guess in terms of intent of the government.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: That is somewhat the effect that it's ending up having anyway.
[Amit Varma]: They have all the data, they have complete control, and they have it in extra quick time.
[Guest]: Look, and it is not to say that the intent was bad when it began from that perspective,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Because we can't, we don't know what the intent was.
[Guest]: Like I'm someone who supported Aadhaar when it started, because I saw the massive benefits
[Guest]: it would bring in if the KYC costs would be taken on by the government.
[Guest]: Because at that point, I remember Nokia had done some presentation which talked about
[Guest]: the cost of authenticating each individual was about 270 rupees.
[Guest]: And therefore that is a massive cost if you want to bring everyone into the financial
[Guest]: system.
[Guest]: Now, the government through Aadhaar was taking on that cost, so that you would have financial
[Guest]: inclusion that comes in.
[Guest]: That's a great idea.
[Guest]: But the beast that it has become on top of that, and the repercussions of collection
[Guest]: of personal information is something which many of us had not considered.
[Guest]: Which is why under the BJP, under Yashwant Sinha, there was this great Parliamentary
[Guest]: Standing Committee report that came out, which pointed towards all of these issues.
[Guest]: Which brings me to my last point, which again, we learned from that particular report, which
[Guest]: was about biometrics being an inexact science.
[Guest]: So there are always going to be people who will be excluded, because biometrics are a
[Guest]: probabilistic means of authentication.
[Guest]: So there will always be false negatives and false positives, which is that there will
[Guest]: be people whose fingerprint is correct, but that they're going to get rejected.
[Guest]: And there are people whose fingerprints do not match, but they will be accepted.
[Guest]: And so, I'd like to see the government actually make Aadhaar mandatory for boarding a flight.
[Guest]: Because there will always be someone who will be rejected.
[Guest]: And the elitism problem that we have in terms of technologists talking about how probabilistic
[Guest]: science is fine, when those guys get denied flights because the fingerprint doesn't match,
[Guest]: I think they'll start thinking about things a little differently.
[Guest]: I don't think for them it really matters that the people who are not able to get their daily
[Guest]: rations or their monthly rations, and the people who are starving because of problems
[Guest]: with Aadhaar, because it's not impacting them personally.
[Amit Varma]: But let's make it mandatory for flights and see what happens.
[Amit Varma]: And also in this context, you can't talk probabilities.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the duty of the state is to protect every single citizen.
[Amit Varma]: You can't exclude anybody to say that a 0.0 whatever percentage is not on, it has to be
[Guest]: zero.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: So there is always going to be exclusion.
[Amit Varma]: Because biometrics are fundamentally flawed.
[Guest]: Because biometrics change, because your fingerprints get worn out, because as you age, they change.
[Guest]: So you know, where effectively, this idea of having a probabilistic authentication,
[Guest]: but also a permanent mode of authentication with biometrics, which can be compromised,
[Guest]: is just bizarre.
[Guest]: Because if by the way, if there is 100% match, there's probably a fake biometric being used.
[Amit Varma]: So the whole edifice falls apart on this basically.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me this, you've, you've outlined a number of problems.
[Amit Varma]: And I think any one of them on their own is a disqualifier by itself.
[Amit Varma]: And together, they're quite overwhelming.
[Amit Varma]: But what are the sort of solutions that you think are possible going forward?
[Guest]: So one is an easy one, which is make it voluntary.
[Guest]: If you don't want one, you shouldn't have to get it.
[Amit Varma]: Make it, make it mandatory, that ship is sail, right?
[Amit Varma]: 900 million people already have it and a lot of the data has already leaked.
[Guest]: So there's another solution.
[Guest]: But the other one was make it optional.
[Guest]: So Aadhaar should be one of the authentication mechanisms used one of many, so that people
[Guest]: can then protect themselves.
[Guest]: One is the idea of deprecating IDs, which is that, let's say if your passport changes
[Guest]: and the passport number changes.
[Guest]: So have Aadhaar deprecate over a period of time so that you have to go and get a new
[Guest]: one that's a new number.
[Guest]: So your, your, your exposure is limited from that perspective.
[Amit Varma]: Or rather you can get a new one if you want to.
[Guest]: If you want to, of course.
[Guest]: One of many IDs in use for any kind of, any kind of authentication.
[Guest]: The other is to give users control to change and revoke their IDs.
[Guest]: So if I want to change my Aadhaar number, I should be able to change it.
[Guest]: If I want to just cancel it and never use it again, I should have the freedom to do
[Guest]: so because that also gives people agency.
[Guest]: One technical solution which is also being used, I think in Denmark is the idea of using
[Guest]: derived authentication or pseudonymization.
[Guest]: So the UIDEA initially had this idea of having a virtual ID, which is going to be built on
[Guest]: top of Aadhaar so that you give your, instead of giving Aadhaar number at places, you give
[Guest]: another ID.
[Guest]: Now the problem with the way they're implementing it is that they're only allowing one virtual
[Guest]: ID at a time.
[Guest]: And the likelihood is that people will not know how to revoke it or change it.
[Guest]: And so their implementation is not that great, but let's say in case of UPI, which is the
[Guest]: payments mechanism, with every app you can create a new ID.
[Guest]: So your bank account doesn't get exposed and one single ID doesn't get exposed.
[Guest]: You also need to give citizens a right to legal recourse.
[Guest]: If I can go to court, then it forces the system to fix itself because there might be monetary
[Guest]: damages on the government or a court ruling might force it to change.
[Guest]: You need a purpose limitation for Aadhaar, which is that it should not be linked to or
[Guest]: usable for sensitive personal information and you should have a limited use case for
[Guest]: which it is allowed.
[Guest]: So as not to create a situation where people overexpose themselves or give their Aadhaar
[Guest]: number or help create databases at a lot of places.
[Guest]: You know, no uses of biometrics whatsoever.
[Guest]: That needs to go.
[Guest]: And in fact, the biometric data that's been collected needs to be destroyed.
[Guest]: Of course, one thing which for this, that ship has sailed, but what other countries
[Guest]: that are looking at similar mechanisms can do is that they need to have a data protection
[Guest]: law and a privacy law before rolling something like this out.
[Guest]: We've obviously done things the wrong way here.
[Guest]: We need money to be spent on an awareness campaign and a disproportionate amount of
[Guest]: the budget needs to be on that awareness campaign so that people understand what to do, what
[Guest]: not to do.
[Guest]: They have a ready reckoner for how not to compromise themselves because there is clearly
[Guest]: there's information asymmetry.
[Guest]: Most people don't realize the impact that this has.
[Guest]: These are some of the ideas that I have.
[Guest]: The push for 100% is actually what is hurting us a lot right now, because in that push we
[Guest]: are more focused on getting to 100% rather than building a system that works.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me something, in your interactions with policy makers, with politicians, with
[Amit Varma]: bureaucrats, how receptive have they all been to these ideas of yours?
[Amit Varma]: Where is the opposition coming from?
[Guest]: I think one is the sunk cost fallacy, that we spend so much money and therefore we can't
[Guest]: destroy it now, which is why these are recommendations for fixing it rather than shelving it altogether
[Guest]: because I think shelving it would be a better idea, but in the absence of that there needs
[Guest]: to be a mechanism to fix it or at least limit the damage that gets caused.
[Guest]: Most opposition members don't like this system because they are also worried about surveillance
[Guest]: and exclusion is a very, very big problem that they are seeing in their own constituencies.
[Guest]: One of the things again that I forgot to mention earlier about the problem with Aadhaar that
[Guest]: it's become a national security risk.
[Guest]: So they are also conscious of that because all this data available, accessible with such
[Guest]: poor security in place compromises most citizens in this country.
[Guest]: Like Aadhaar is the biggest honeypot that exists for any hacker to get into because
[Guest]: effectively you can dismantle a country's financial system if you get access to all
[Amit Varma]: of this data, one way or another.
[Amit Varma]: Which seems fairly easy to do, I mean, given the protections in place.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So we have a, but at least from the government side, I don't think they're really engaging
[Guest]: or they're talking much right now because for them they don't want to admit that there's
[Guest]: a problem because that's the way politics currently works.
[Guest]: No one wants to admit to having made a mistake.
[Guest]: I'm not sure where the Congress stands on all of this because at one level you have
[Guest]: Kapil Sibal arguing very well in court, I mean, pushing back against some provisions
[Guest]: in Aadhaar.
[Guest]: But at the same time you have the Karnataka Congress which is pushing an Aadhaar bill.
[Guest]: So you know, I think there is, it's almost two-faced the way they're behaving.
[Guest]: We don't have, no one has a solution right now or no one wants to even try for the solution
[Guest]: by the looks of it.
[Amit Varma]: So Nikhil, I'm going to, I'm going to ask you to sum it up by referring to a quote of
[Amit Varma]: yours from a TV interview I saw recently, where you said that the Supreme Court decision
[Amit Varma]: about Aadhaar is, quote, the most important decision in our history, unquote.
[Amit Varma]: And then you went on to say, quote, what we do, and by we you meant the citizens of India,
[Amit Varma]: what we do will impact generations, unquote.
[Amit Varma]: These are very big words.
[Amit Varma]: This is a very, very big issue.
[Amit Varma]: The consequences are very momentous.
[Guest]: Sum it up for me.
[Guest]: No, I think that the amount of data that we're releasing right now through this, and remember
[Guest]: this is, Aadhaar is going to get linked to the DNA database when it gets created, once
[Guest]: the DNA bill gets passed, right?
[Amit Varma]: So like you said, our lives are data, we are data.
[Guest]: Yeah, we are data.
[Guest]: And so therefore, from an individual liberty perspective, this is, this is the biggest
[Guest]: decision that's going to be taken about our future, about our data, about our interactions,
[Guest]: because effectively, this is going to be used by algorithms to, on the good side, give us
[Guest]: loans, but on the bad side, change the way we vote maybe in the future, or whether there
[Guest]: is any totality in action by some government in the future.
[Guest]: So really, these are our rights that are going to get impacted in ways that we can't really
[Guest]: imagine right now.
[Guest]: This is also the creation of a mass surveillance state with very limited checks and balances,
[Guest]: because frankly, on under the guise of national security, very few checks and balances exist,
[Guest]: if at all.
[Guest]: So what we need to do as citizens is really push back now.
[Guest]: I mean, it has to, I said this to some of the lawyers in the Supreme Court case a couple
[Guest]: of years ago, that this only gets fixed when it becomes an election issue.
[Guest]: I hope that the Supreme Court does the right thing, because they are effectively going
[Guest]: to get judged for what they judge or for what they do.
[Guest]: But we can't depend on courts entirely on this.
[Guest]: This is a political problem.
[Guest]: And I think there has to be a political solution.
[Amit Varma]: And it is on citizens to force a political solution for this.
[Amit Varma]: So I think anyone who's been listening to this episode will, I think, agree with me
[Amit Varma]: that if we don't act now, it might be too late from a citizen's perspective.
[Amit Varma]: But if my listeners want to know, want to ask you that, okay, I'm really concerned,
[Amit Varma]: but what concrete thing can I do now as a citizen?
[Guest]: A whole bunch of things, right?
[Guest]: Number one, we have a site called speakforme.in, which allows you to mail your MP.
[Guest]: There's some pre-prepared text in that, go and change it, right, whatever you want, and
[Guest]: just send it to your MP.
[Guest]: Because once MPs know that their constituents are worried, there is a likelihood that they
[Guest]: will again internally push their parties to improve the way they're thinking about it.
[Guest]: Call them up, call them out.
[Guest]: Whatever you can, inform more people about the issues, because right now what's happening
[Guest]: is that most people don't understand the problems that we're dealing with.
[Guest]: Share this podcast with as many people as possible, so that people realize that the
[Guest]: scale of the problem that we're facing right now, and you know, this has been pretty exhausting
[Guest]: because for a lot of us who've been talking about this issue over the past few years,
[Guest]: and especially for Usha Ramanathan, who's been talking about this for almost six, seven
[Guest]: years now, if not more, it's a very lonely battle because most people don't either understand
[Guest]: the scope of the problem, understand the issues, and things are changing so quickly that every
[Guest]: time a new solution comes up, you're wondering, or something that the UIDAI does, for example,
[Guest]: with FaceID or with Virtual ID that they were doing, you'd think that that solves the problem
[Guest]: even though it doesn't.
[Guest]: So I would say do not trust the government on this, do not trust the UIDAI on this, because
[Guest]: they're trying to retain a system which is flawed.
[Guest]: Go out and tell them that you want them to either remove the system or fix the system,
[Guest]: because the only thing that you have going for you is your vote right now.
[Guest]: I don't think there is any other option to solve this problem.
[Amit Varma]: That's an inspiring call to action.
[Amit Varma]: May you never walk alone.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show, Nikhil.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me here.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do follow Nikhil on Twitter at nixxin, at Nixon.
[Amit Varma]: You can also read his writings and follow the work of his colleagues at medianama.com.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at amitvarma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And for past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen, do hop over to seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: He bends down to test the warm water for his bath.
[Unknown]: He comes here to quench his thirst for a hot shower and some podcasts.
[Unknown]: You can witness how he enjoys having other people talk about cool stuff in his bathroom.
[Unknown]: Indeed, it helps him with his loneliness.
[Unknown]: You can find more of his species on ivmpodcast.com, your one-stop destination where you can check
[Unknown]: out the coolest Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.